---
layout: post
title:  "Salsa Language"
date:   2018-10-28 23:13:33 +0200
categories: jekyll update
---

# Salsa 
Dancing Salsa can be a lot of fun. However, as a beginner you may have a hard time. Especially as the leading partner: When leading, you are largely responsible for designing the dance. Naturally, as you start, you have a very limited knowledge of figures and moves, which can be quite frustrating.
In addition, in a typical social dancing situation, you might feel overwhelmed with doing everything at once: Leading the following partner, keeping the rhythm, keeping eye contact and at the same time looking as if you enjoy all of that (e.g. by keeping up a smile). Under this computational cost your memory can often deny you access to the move patterns you theoretically knew. The default advice, that gets thrown at you, from every source you consult, is *practice, practice and practice ...*

This leaves you wondering, if there is a smarter or more effective way than learning through practice? Yes, there is. There is one simple hack to memory, that is known in human civilization for at least a couple of millenia. That is, **writing things down**.

But how to write down a dance pattern? English, or natural human languages for that matter, are highly adapted to communicating ideas and thoughts, but cumbersome for describing a delicate physical movement without being too wordy. Videos help. And I can recommend  watching YouTube videos or filming yourself, but if you just want to a quick reference to a move or want to start seeing the commonalities and correspondences across sequences more clearly, you may want a representation that is both more customizable and explicit, such as a **Salsa Language**.

A code for Salsa should (like any code) make use of the underlying patterns of what it represents. A concise model of Salsa is a given by a **Hidden Markov Model** (HMM) ([wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_Markov_model)). This models a dance as a sequence of states *s* that are linked by certain state transitions, induced by actions *a*. As a lead, if you know what actions are possible from what state, you may combine and create your own dance patterns. Learning salsa patterns now (in theory) simplifies to learning state-action pairs *(s, a)*.

Initially, I searched the internet for an existing codification of Salsa and found a nice source in [salsaisgood.com](http://www.salsaisgood.com/dictionary/Salsa_language.htm). They describe each tact in the music in five lines of symbols for hand hold, direction, lead, common action, follow. Starting from their ideas, I tried to simplify and streamline, which I will present in the following:

## Salsa Language
Salsa consists of states *s* and actions *a*. The actions can induce state transitions. Any finite dance pattern can then be represented by a sequence of state-action pairs.
*(s, a, s, a, s, a ...)*

For clarity I will refer to the leading partner with masculine gender and to the following partner with a female gender in the following.

---

### States
The basic salsa positions are:

|States| Name | Variants
|------|------|----------|
|  0   | normal no hands |
|  N   | normal hold hands |
|  S   | side position | Sc : close side position
|  C   | normal closed |
|  X   | normal crossed hands |
|  SM  | sombrero |
|  HL  | hammerlock | HLr : other side hammerlock
|  KL  | cuddle lock | KLr : other side cuddle lock
|  TT  | titanic (her in front of him) | TTm : him in front of her titanic

---

### Actions
The transitions between states are induced by actions: 

|Actions| Name | Variants
|-------|------|-----------
|      p   | push her |
|      z   | pull her |
|      @   | turn her | @m : he turns, @b : both turn, @/2 half turn
|      e   | comb her hair |em : self-comb (m for lead)
|      xbl |  cross body lead | xbl@ : with turn
|      cc  |  coca cola |
|      sg  |  she goes |  hg :  he goes, hgsg : he goes she goes
|      xh  | switch hands |
|      ?   | walk around her |?b walk in circle around each other
|      d   | dip her |
|      $   |  snake up under arm |
|      !   | stop her in motion |

For example: 

- N @ N 
- N xbl N 
- N @/2 KL 
- N @ HL
- N cc C 
- C xbl N
- N xh X
- X xbl@ TT
- X @ SM xbl N

The intermediate states or actions can also be left out, if they are deemed obvious: 

- N p hg sg xbl N
- N S

---

### Specifiers

If they states and actions are not obvious, or at least ambiguous, one might need more information, which is provided by *specifiers*.
There are three types of specifiers: directions, hand positions and body parts:

|Specifiers      | Type 
|----------------|--------------
| <<, ><, >>, <> |directions
| °°, .., °., .° |hand positions
| hp, sr, bk, hd | body parts

---

To indicate the relative **direction** of the two partners towards each other, one may specify if they are facing each other. 

| Directions | Explanation
|------------|------------------
| < >        |face-to-face
| > <        |back-to-back
| < <        | he stands behind her
| > >        | she stands behind him

The directions can supplement a state, or act as state on there own. 

---

Each state or action *x* can be supplied with the **hand position**.

| Hands | Explanation  | Variants
|-------|--------------|-----------
| °x°   | both hands up| °x : left hand up, x° right hand up
| .x.   | both hands down | °x : left hand down, x° right hand down
| °x.   | left hand up, right down |
| .x°   | left hand up, right down |

For example: .N is then the normal position with just the left hand holding her right hand.

-  the standard turn N @ N can be specified to become °N °@ .N 
-  hammerlock turn N @ HL becomes °N. °@. °HL. 

The hand indications are expecially useful for the push *p* : 

- .N .p hg .N .p sg .z Sc xbl N , which is a more detailed way now to write:  N hg sg xbl .N.


---

To specify a specific **body part** *x*, one may add a *(x)* to the state or action.

| Body Parts | Explanation  |
|------------|--------------|
| hp         | hip / waist  |
| sr         | shoulder     |
| bk         | back         |
| hd         | head         |
| lb         | elbow        |
| ft         | foot         |

For example, KL(hp) means: "cuddle lock with the hands at the waist", @(sr)! means: "stop at the shoulder after turning" and xh(bk) means: "change hands behind her back".
