---
layout: post
title:  "Salsa Language"
date:   2018-10-23 23:13:33 +0200
categories: jekyll update
---
# Salsa
Dancing Salsa can be a lot of fun. However, as a beginner you have to overcome your fear of embarrassment. As lead you are largely responsible for designing the dance. Naturally as you start you have a very limited knowledge of figures and moves, which can be quite frustrating.
Most irritating though is, when you know, that you should be able to remember some move, but for whatever reason fail to do so. Especially under the excitement and stress of a typical social dancing situation I found it hard to recollect, what I was supposed to know.  The standard advice here is practise, practise and practise ...

Can there be something smarter, better and more effective than learning by doing? There is one simple hack to memory, that has been around in human culture for at least a couple of millenia. That is, **writing things down**.

But how to write down a dance? English (or German for that matter) is highly adapted to communicating ideas and thoughts, but cumbersome for describing a delicate physical movement without being too wordy. Watching Salsa Videos on YouTube or filming on your own fills that need quite swiftly and I can recommend that as well, and repeatedly watching a video could do the trick, but if you just want to look up a move or want to see the commonalities and correspondences across sequences, you may need a **Salsa Language**.

To be clear, it is more of a notational codification of move patterns than a language in itself. A code for Salsa moves should (like any code) make use of the underlying patterns of what it represents. A concise description of Salsa is a given by a **Hidden Markov Model**: Through a simplifying lens a dance consists of a sequence of states *s* that are linked by certain state transitions, induced by actions *a*. As a lead, if you know what actions are possible from what state, you may combine and create your own dance patterns. Learning salsa now (in theory) simplifies to learning state-action pairs *(s, a)*.

Initially, I looked in the internet if somebody had already tried to codify this for Salsa and found a nice source in [salsaisgood.com](http://www.salsaisgood.com/dictionary/Salsa_language.htm), but their five-dimensional state-action description is neither handy nor compact. The dimensions they chose are: hand hold, direction, lead, common action, follow. Using five lines for one "word" may be a rigorous way to see salsa, but obstructs the usual sequential parsing, that we are used to from other written languages. Breaking it down to one line and leaving out


# Salsa

## States
 0 normal no hands
 N normal both hands,
 S to side
 C closed position CC very close
X normal cross hands
 SM sombrero
HL hammerlock
 KL cuddle lock
 TT titanic: same as N<< but move to side


 ## Actions
 p push
 @ turn, @b both turn, @m man turns, @@ double turn @/2 half turn @h turn her at head
 @i turn in @o turn out (local female coordinate system)
 e comb em comb self
 xbl cross body lead
 xh change hands xh° change hand from above to below (behind back)
 ? walk around her ?b walk in circle around each other
 d dip
 $ snake up
 \# stop in motion and bounce back #s stop at shoulder
 ..h°° hands over her head
 & style improvisation

 # Specifiers (for disambiguiation, if needed)
 state specifier <> face-to-face << lead behind >> follow behind >< back-to-back  >><< ass-to-ass
 hands as state/action specifier: e.g. °N., °HL., °p, e°# Actions

 # Reference
 [Another Salsa Language](http://www.salsaisgood.com/dictionary/Salsa_language.html) (I took some naming from them, but found their formal system too rigorous for practical purposes)
